docs/guides/5-custom-functions.md, before:

# Custom Functions

If the built-in functions are not enough for your [custom ruleset](../getting-started/3-rulesets.md), Spectral allows you to write and use your own custom functions.

Create a directory to contain your new functions. By default `functions/` is assumed.

**functions/abc.js**

```js
module.exports = targetVal => {
  if (targetVal !== "hello") {
    return [
      {
        message: 'Value must equal "hello".',
      },
    ];
  }
};
```

The function is exported anonymously but it has the name `abc` from the file. This name is then loaded in your [ruleset](./4-custom-rulesets.md), via `functions: [abc]`.

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [abc]
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.greeting.message"
    then:
      function: "abc"
```

The function is looking for a targetVal of `"hello"` for anywhere its applied, and this rule uses a given target of `$.greeting`.

If the object being linted looks like this, everything is going to be ok.

```yaml
greeting:
  message: hello
```

If the message was goodbye, we'd have a problem.

## Writing Functions

A custom function might be any JavaScript function compliant with [IFunction](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/blob/90a0864863fa232bf367a26dace61fd9f93198db/src/types/function.ts#L3#L8) type.

```ts
export type IFunction<O = any> = (targetValue: any, options: O, paths: IFunctionPaths, otherValues: IFunctionValues) => void | IFunctionResult[];
```

### Validating options

If you are writing a function that accepts options, you should provide a JSON Schema that describes those options.

You can do it as follows:

```yaml
functions:
- equals
  # can be any valid JSON Schema Draft 07
  - properties:
      value:
        type: string
        description: Value to check equality for
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.info"
    then:
      function: "equals"
      functionOptions:
        value: "abc"
```

Where the function `functions/equals.js` might look like:

```js
module.exports = (targetVal, opts) => {
  const { value } = opts;

  if (targetVal !== value) {
    return [
      {
        message: `Value must equal {value}.`,
      },
    ];
  }
};
```

### targetValue

`targetValue` the value the custom function is provided with and is supposed to lint against.

It's based on `given` [JSON Path][jsonpath] expression defined on the rule and optionally `field` if placed on `then`.

For example, a rule might have `given` with a JSON Path expression of `$`, and the following partial of an OpenAPI document:

```yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: foo
```

In this example, `targetValue` would be a JavaScript object literal containing `openapi` and `info` properties. If you changed `given` to `$.info.title`, then `targetValue` would equal `"foo"`.

### options

Options corresponds to `functionOptions` that's defined in `then` property of each rule.

Each rule can specify options that each function should receive. This can be done as follows

```yaml
operation-id-kebab-case:
  given: "$"
  then:
    function: pattern
    functionOptions: # this object be passed down as options to the custom function
      match: ^[a-z][a-z0-9\-]*$
```

### paths

`paths.given` contains [JSON Path][jsonpath] expression you set in a rule - in `given` field.

If a particular rule has a `field` property in `then`, that path will be exposed as `paths.target`.

### otherValues

`otherValues.original` and `otherValues.given` are equal for the most of time and represent the value matched using JSON Path expression.

`otherValues.resolved` serves for internal purposes, therefore we discourage using it in custom functions.

Custom functions take exactly the same arguments as built-in functions do, so you are more than welcome to take a look at the existing implementation.

The process of creating a function involves 2 steps:

- create a js file inside of a directory called `functions` that should be placed next to your ruleset file
- create a `functions` array in your ruleset if you haven't done it yet and place a string with the filename without `.js` extension

## Returning multiple results

Many functions will return a single message, but it is possible for a function to return multiple.

For example, if a rule is created to make sure something is unique, it could either:

- return a single error for the entire array which lists offending values in a comma separated list
- return a single error for the array value which contains the first offending non-unique item
- return multiple errors for each duplicate value located

How exactly you chose to implement messages depends on the rule at hand and probably personal preference too.

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [uniqueTagNames]
rules:
  unique-tag-names:
    message: "Tags should have distinct names: {{error}}"
    given: "$.tags"
    then:
      function: "uniqueTagNames"
```

**functions/uniqueTagNames.js**

```js
const NAME_PROPERTY = "name";

module.exports = (targetVal, _opts, paths) => {
  if (!Array.isArray(targetVal)) {
    return;
  }

  const seen = [];
  const results = [];

  const rootPath = paths.target !== void 0 ? paths.target : paths.given;

  for (let i = 0; i < targetVal.length; i++) {
    if (targetVal[i] === null || typeof targetVal[i] !== "object") {
      continue;
    }

    const tagName = targetVal[i][NAME_PROPERTY];

    if (tagName === void 0) {
      continue;
    }

    if (seen.includes(tagName)) {
      results.push({
        message: `Duplicate tag name '${tagName}'`,
        path: [...rootPath, i, NAME_PROPERTY],
      });
    } else {
      seen.push(tagName);
    }
  }

  return results;
};
```

It's worth keeping in mind, Spectral will attempt to deduplicate messages when they bear the same `code` and target the same `path`.

As such, when your custom function is susceptible to return more than one result, you have to specify a different `path` for each result.

## Async Functions

As of Spectral 5.4.0, custom functions can also be asynchronous.

<!-- theme: warning -->

> Ideally linting should always be deterministic, which means if its run 10 times it should return the same results 10 times. To ensure this is the case, please refrain from introducing any logic that is prone to non-deterministic behavior. Examples of this might be contacting external service you have no control over, or that might be unstable, or change the way it responds over time.
> While, it may seem tempting to have a function that does so, the primary use case is to support libraries that makes async fs calls or exchanging information, i.e. obtaining a dictionary file, with a locally running server, etc.

**functions/dictionary.js**

```js
const CACHE_KEY = "dictionary";

module.exports = async function (targetVal) {
  if (!this.cache.has(CACHE_KEY)) {
    const res = await fetch("https://dictionary.com/evil");
    if (res.ok) {
      this.cache.set(CACHE_KEY, await res.json());
    } else {
      // you can either re-try or just throw an error
    }
  }

  const dictionary = this.cache.get(CACHE_KEY);

  if (dictionary.includes(targetVal)) {
    return [{ message: `\`${targetVal}\` is a forbidden word.` }];
  }
};
```

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [dictionary]
rules:
  no-evil-words:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: ["$.info.title", "$.info.description"]
    then:
      function: "dictionary"
```

### Caching

Performs anything slow inside a function (like `fs` calls), you may want to leverage cache.

```js
module.exports = function () {
  if (!this.cache.has("cached-item")) {
    this.cache.set("cached-item", anyValue);
  }

  const cached = this.cache.get("cached-item");

  // the rest of function
};
```

Each custom function is provided with its **own** cache instance that has a function-life lifespan, which means the cache is persisted for the whole life of a particular function.

The cache will be retained between subsequent function calls and is never invalidated unless you compile the function again, i.e. load a ruleset again.

In other words:

- Using the JavaScript API, so long as your ruleset remains unchanged, all subsequent `spectral.run()` calls will invoke custom functions with the same cache instance.
  As soon as you set a ruleset using `setRuleset()` or `loadRuleset()` method, each custom function will receive a new cache instance.

- Using the CLI, the cache will be invalidated when the process terminates.

You can store any kind of data, using cache for exchanging information between subsequent function calls is strongly discouraged. Also, Spectral does not guarantee any particular order of execution meaning the functions can be executed in random order, depending on the rules you have, and the document you lint.

## Changing Directory

Want to place your functions in somewhere other than the `functions/` directory? Use the `functionsDir` keyword in your ruleset.

```yaml
functions: [abc]
# any path relative to the ruleset file is okay
functionsDir: "./my-functions"
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.info"
    then:
      function: "abc"
```

## Security Concerns

Please, do keep in mind that for the time being, the code is **not** executed in a sandboxed environment, so be very careful when including external rulesets.

This indicates that almost any arbitrary code can be executed.

Potential risks include:

- data / credentials infiltration,
- data tampering,
- running cpu-intensive tasks, i.e. crypto-mining.

While the risk is relatively low, you should be careful about including **external rulesets** you are not in charge of, in particular those that leverage custom functions.
You are strongly encouraged to review the custom functions a given ruleset provides.
What you should hunt for is:

- obfuscated code,
- calls to an untrusted external library,
- places where remote code is executed.

If you notice any weirdness, consider forking the ruleset and removal of any evil-looking code.

## Inheritance

Core functions can be overridden with custom rulesets, so if you'd like to make your own truthy go ahead. Custom functions are only available in the ruleset which defines them, so loading a foo in one ruleset will not clobber a foo in another ruleset.

## Performance tips

- try to avoid allocating objects as much as possible if your custom function might is very generic, and therefore is expected to be used by plenty of rules.
  If your document is huge enough, and JSON path expression is loose (meaning it matches a lot of properties), your function might be called hundreds of thousands of times.

```
// bad
module.exports = (targetVal, { excludedWords }) => {
  const results = []; // the array is always allocated, even if targetVal is perfectly valid

  if (excludedWords.includes('foo')) {
     results.push({ error: 'Forbidden word used' });
  }

  return results;
}
```

```
// better, no temporary array if targetVal is valid
module.exports = (targetVal, { excludedWords }) => {
  if (excludedWords.includes('foo')) {
     return [{ error: 'Forbidden word used' }];
  }
}
```

## Supporting Multiple Environments

Spectral is meant to support a variety of environments, so ideally your function should behave similarly in Node.js and browser contexts. Do not rely on globals or functions specific to a particular environment. For example, do not expect the browser `window` global to always be available, since this global is not available in Node.js environments.

If you need to access environment specific APIs, make sure you provide an alternative for other environments. A good example of such a situation is `fetch` - a function available natively in a browser context, but missing in Node.js.

To keep your code cross-platform, you'd need to use a cross platform package such as [node-fetch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-fetch) or [isomorphic-fetch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/isomorphic-fetch), both of which implement spec-compliant fetch API and work in Node.js.

## Code Transpilation

We encourage you to not transpile the code to ES5 if you can help it. Spectral does not support older environments than ES2017, so there is no need to bloat the bundle with useless transformations and polyfills. Ship untransformed async/await, do not include unneeded shims, it's all good.

Another caveat is that ES Modules and other modules systems are not supported. Although, you are recommended to write ES2017 code, you should not be using require or imports.

To give you an example of a good code:

```js
module.exports = obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

You do not need to provide any shim for `Object.entries` or use [regenerator](https://facebook.github.io/regenerator/) for the `for of` loop. As stated, you cannot use ES Modules, so the following code is considered as invalid and won't work correctly.

```js
export default obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

Require calls will work only in Node.js, and will cause errors for anyone trying to use the ruleset in the browser. If your ruleset is definitely going to only be used in the context of NodeJS then using them is ok, but if you are distributing your rulesets to the public we recommend avoiding the use of `require()` to increase portability.

```js
const foo = require("./foo");

module.exports = obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

If you have any module system, you need to use some bundler, preferably Rollup.js as it generates efficient bundles.

We are still evaluating the idea of supporting ESModule and perhaps we will decide to bring support for ES Modules at some point, yet for now you cannot use them.

[jsonpath]: https://jsonpath.com/

Commit message:

docs(custom-functions): update otherValues & add info regarding core functions

docs/guides/5-custom-functions.md, after:

# Custom Functions

If the core functions are not enough for your [custom ruleset](../getting-started/3-rulesets.md), Spectral allows you to write and use your own custom functions.

Create a directory to contain your new functions. By default `functions/` is assumed.

**functions/abc.js**

```js
module.exports = targetVal => {
  if (targetVal !== "hello") {
    return [
      {
        message: 'Value must equal "hello".',
      },
    ];
  }
};
```

The function is exported anonymously but it has the name `abc` from the file. This name is then loaded in your [ruleset](./4-custom-rulesets.md), via `functions: [abc]`.

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [abc]
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.greeting.message"
    then:
      function: "abc"
```

The function is looking for a targetVal of `"hello"` for anywhere its applied, and this rule uses a given target of `$.greeting`.

If the object being linted looks like this, everything is going to be ok.

```yaml
greeting:
  message: hello
```

If the message was goodbye, we'd have a problem.

## Writing Functions

A custom function might be any JavaScript function compliant with [IFunction](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/blob/90a0864863fa232bf367a26dace61fd9f93198db/src/types/function.ts#L3#L8) type.

```ts
export type IFunction<O = any> = (targetValue: any, options: O, paths: IFunctionPaths, otherValues: IFunctionValues) => void | IFunctionResult[];
```

### Validating options

If you are writing a function that accepts options, you should provide a JSON Schema that describes those options.

You can do it as follows:

```yaml
functions:
- equals
  # can be any valid JSON Schema Draft 07
  - properties:
      value:
        type: string
        description: Value to check equality for
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.info"
    then:
      function: "equals"
      functionOptions:
        value: "abc"
```

Where the function `functions/equals.js` might look like:

```js
module.exports = (targetVal, opts) => {
  const { value } = opts;

  if (targetVal !== value) {
    return [
      {
        message: `Value must equal {value}.`,
      },
    ];
  }
};
```

### targetValue

`targetValue` the value the custom function is provided with and is supposed to lint against.

It's based on `given` [JSON Path][jsonpath] expression defined on the rule and optionally `field` if placed on `then`.

For example, a rule might have `given` with a JSON Path expression of `$`, and the following partial of an OpenAPI document:

```yaml
openapi: 3.0.0
info:
  title: foo
```

In this example, `targetValue` would be a JavaScript object literal containing `openapi` and `info` properties. If you changed `given` to `$.info.title`, then `targetValue` would equal `"foo"`.

### options

Options corresponds to `functionOptions` that's defined in `then` property of each rule.

Each rule can specify options that each function should receive. This can be done as follows

```yaml
operation-id-kebab-case:
  given: "$"
  then:
    function: pattern
    functionOptions: # this object be passed down as options to the custom function
      match: ^[a-z][a-z0-9\-]*$
```

### paths

`paths.given` contains [JSON Path][jsonpath] expression you set in a rule - in `given` field.

If a particular rule has a `field` property in `then`, that path will be exposed as `paths.target`.

### otherValues

`otherValues.original` and `otherValues.given` are equal for the most of time and represent the value matched using JSON Path expression.

`otherValues.documentInventory` provides an access to resolved and unresolved documents as well as some other advanced properties.
You shouldn't need it for most of the time. For the list of available options, please refer to the [source code](../../src/documentInventory.ts).

`otherValues.rule` an actual rule your function was called for.

Custom functions take exactly the same arguments as core functions do, so you are more than welcome to take a look at the existing implementation.

The process of creating a function involves 2 steps:

- create a js file inside of a directory called `functions` that should be placed next to your ruleset file
- create a `functions` array in your ruleset if you haven't done it yet and place a string with the filename without `.js` extension

## Returning multiple results

Many functions will return a single message, but it is possible for a function to return multiple.

For example, if a rule is created to make sure something is unique, it could either:

- return a single error for the entire array which lists offending values in a comma separated list
- return a single error for the array value which contains the first offending non-unique item
- return multiple errors for each duplicate value located

How exactly you chose to implement messages depends on the rule at hand and probably personal preference too.

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [uniqueTagNames]
rules:
  unique-tag-names:
    message: "Tags should have distinct names: {{error}}"
    given: "$.tags"
    then:
      function: "uniqueTagNames"
```

**functions/uniqueTagNames.js**

```js
const NAME_PROPERTY = "name";

module.exports = (targetVal, _opts, paths) => {
  if (!Array.isArray(targetVal)) {
    return;
  }

  const seen = [];
  const results = [];

  const rootPath = paths.target !== void 0 ? paths.target : paths.given;

  for (let i = 0; i < targetVal.length; i++) {
    if (targetVal[i] === null || typeof targetVal[i] !== "object") {
      continue;
    }

    const tagName = targetVal[i][NAME_PROPERTY];

    if (tagName === void 0) {
      continue;
    }

    if (seen.includes(tagName)) {
      results.push({
        message: `Duplicate tag name '${tagName}'`,
        path: [...rootPath, i, NAME_PROPERTY],
      });
    } else {
      seen.push(tagName);
    }
  }

  return results;
};
```

It's worth keeping in mind, Spectral will attempt to deduplicate messages when they bear the same `code` and target the same `path`.

As such, when your custom function is susceptible to return more than one result, you have to specify a different `path` for each result.

## Referencing core functions

Your custom function may also build on top of existing functions Spectral offers.
To reference a given core function, access `this.functions`.
Make sure to provide all arguments that was originally passed to your function, otherwise a core function may misbehave.

### Example

```js
module.exports = function (targetVal, ...args) {
  if (targetVal.info["skip-info"] === true) {
    // if info has a property with key called "skip-info" and its value is true, let's do nothing
    return;
  }

  // otherwise call the truthy function
  return this.functions.truthy(targetVal.info, ...args);
};
```

## Async Functions

As of Spectral 5.4.0, custom functions can also be asynchronous.

<!-- theme: warning -->

> Ideally linting should always be deterministic, which means if its run 10 times it should return the same results 10 times. To ensure this is the case, please refrain from introducing any logic that is prone to non-deterministic behavior. Examples of this might be contacting external service you have no control over, or that might be unstable, or change the way it responds over time.
> While, it may seem tempting to have a function that does so, the primary use case is to support libraries that makes async fs calls or exchanging information, i.e. obtaining a dictionary file, with a locally running server, etc.

**functions/dictionary.js**

```js
const CACHE_KEY = "dictionary";

module.exports = async function (targetVal) {
  if (!this.cache.has(CACHE_KEY)) {
    const res = await fetch("https://dictionary.com/evil");
    if (res.ok) {
      this.cache.set(CACHE_KEY, await res.json());
    } else {
      // you can either re-try or just throw an error
    }
  }

  const dictionary = this.cache.get(CACHE_KEY);

  if (dictionary.includes(targetVal)) {
    return [{ message: `\`${targetVal}\` is a forbidden word.` }];
  }
};
```

**my-ruleset.yaml**

```yaml
functions: [dictionary]
rules:
  no-evil-words:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: ["$.info.title", "$.info.description"]
    then:
      function: "dictionary"
```

### Caching

Performs anything slow inside a function (like `fs` calls), you may want to leverage cache.

```js
module.exports = function () {
  if (!this.cache.has("cached-item")) {
    this.cache.set("cached-item", anyValue);
  }

  const cached = this.cache.get("cached-item");

  // the rest of function
};
```

Each custom function is provided with its **own** cache instance that has a function-life lifespan, which means the cache is persisted for the whole life of a particular function.

The cache will be retained between subsequent function calls and is never invalidated unless you compile the function again, i.e. load a ruleset again.

In other words:

- Using the JavaScript API, so long as your ruleset remains unchanged, all subsequent `spectral.run()` calls will invoke custom functions with the same cache instance.
  As soon as you set a ruleset using `setRuleset()` or `loadRuleset()` method, each custom function will receive a new cache instance.

- Using the CLI, the cache will be invalidated when the process terminates.

You can store any kind of data, using cache for exchanging information between subsequent function calls is strongly discouraged. Also, Spectral does not guarantee any particular order of execution meaning the functions can be executed in random order, depending on the rules you have, and the document you lint.

## Changing Directory

Want to place your functions in somewhere other than the `functions/` directory? Use the `functionsDir` keyword in your ruleset.

```yaml
functions: [abc]
# any path relative to the ruleset file is okay
functionsDir: "./my-functions"
rules:
  my-rule:
    message: "{{error}}"
    given: "$.info"
    then:
      function: "abc"
```

## Security Concerns

Please, do keep in mind that for the time being, the code is **not** executed in a sandboxed environment, so be very careful when including external rulesets.

This indicates that almost any arbitrary code can be executed.

Potential risks include:

- data / credentials infiltration,
- data tampering,
- running cpu-intensive tasks, i.e. crypto-mining.

While the risk is relatively low, you should be careful about including **external rulesets** you are not in charge of, in particular those that leverage custom functions.
You are strongly encouraged to review the custom functions a given ruleset provides.
What you should hunt for is:

- obfuscated code,
- calls to an untrusted external library,
- places where remote code is executed.

If you notice any weirdness, consider forking the ruleset and removal of any evil-looking code.

## Inheritance

Core functions can be overridden with custom rulesets, so if you'd like to make your own truthy go ahead. Custom functions are only available in the ruleset which defines them, so loading a foo in one ruleset will not clobber a foo in another ruleset.

## Performance tips

- try to avoid allocating objects as much as possible if your custom function might is very generic, and therefore is expected to be used by plenty of rules.
  If your document is huge enough, and JSON path expression is loose (meaning it matches a lot of properties), your function might be called hundreds of thousands of times.

```
// bad
module.exports = (targetVal, { excludedWords }) => {
  const results = []; // the array is always allocated, even if targetVal is perfectly valid

  if (excludedWords.includes('foo')) {
     results.push({ error: 'Forbidden word used' });
  }

  return results;
}
```

```
// better, no temporary array if targetVal is valid
module.exports = (targetVal, { excludedWords }) => {
  if (excludedWords.includes('foo')) {
     return [{ error: 'Forbidden word used' }];
  }
}
```

## Supporting Multiple Environments

Spectral is meant to support a variety of environments, so ideally your function should behave similarly in Node.js and browser contexts. Do not rely on globals or functions specific to a particular environment. For example, do not expect the browser `window` global to always be available, since this global is not available in Node.js environments.

If you need to access environment specific APIs, make sure you provide an alternative for other environments. A good example of such a situation is `fetch` - a function available natively in a browser context, but missing in Node.js.

To keep your code cross-platform, you'd need to use a cross platform package such as [node-fetch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-fetch) or [isomorphic-fetch](https://www.npmjs.com/package/isomorphic-fetch), both of which implement spec-compliant fetch API and work in Node.js.

## Code Transpilation

We encourage you to not transpile the code to ES5 if you can help it. Spectral does not support older environments than ES2017, so there is no need to bloat the bundle with useless transformations and polyfills. Ship untransformed async/await, do not include unneeded shims, it's all good.

Another caveat is that ES Modules and other modules systems are not supported. Although, you are recommended to write ES2017 code, you should not be using require or imports.

To give you an example of a good code:

```js
module.exports = obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

You do not need to provide any shim for `Object.entries` or use [regenerator](https://facebook.github.io/regenerator/) for the `for of` loop. As stated, you cannot use ES Modules, so the following code is considered as invalid and won't work correctly.

```js
export default obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

Require calls will work only in Node.js, and will cause errors for anyone trying to use the ruleset in the browser. If your ruleset is definitely going to only be used in the context of NodeJS then using them is ok, but if you are distributing your rulesets to the public we recommend avoiding the use of `require()` to increase portability.

```js
const foo = require("./foo");

module.exports = obj => {
  for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(obj)) {
    // this is a perfectly fine code
  }
};
```

If you have any module system, you need to use some bundler, preferably Rollup.js as it generates efficient bundles.

We are still evaluating the idea of supporting ESModule and perhaps we will decide to bring support for ES Modules at some point, yet for now you cannot use them.

[jsonpath]: https://jsonpath.com/
