# Spectral v5 to "v6" Migration Guide

## General

1. Spectral has become a monorepo now and CLI <-> Core have been split into separate packages.
   If you intend to use a CLI version of Spectral make sure to install `@stoplight/spectral-cli`.
   Otherwise, go with `@stoplight/spectral-core` which is the JS API.

2. No default ruleset is loaded by default as of now, thus if you don't supply a ruleset, Spectral will refuse to lint the document.
   If you use CLI, make sure to have a valid ruleset in your project or use a `--ruleset` flag.
   JS API has a method called `setRuleset` which can be used to set the relevant ruleset.

3. Spectral is stricter overall and certain soft errors that previously were marked as warnings will throw now.

## Core

1. `run` does not accept `{ documentUri }`. Please use `Document` and specify the source of the document there.

Workaround:

```ts
import { Document, Spectral } from "@stoplight/spectral-core";
import { Json as JsonParser } from "@stoplight/spectral-parsers";
import * as path from "@stoplight/path";

const s = new Spectral();

const doc = new Document(
  `{
  "street": null
}`,
  JsonParser,
  path.join(__dirname, "street-doc.json"),
);

await spectral.run(doc);
```

2. Spectral constructor takes no `proxyUri`.

```ts
import { Document, Spectral } from "@stoplight/spectral-core";
import { Json as JsonParser } from "@stoplight/spectral-parsers";
import * as path from "@stoplight/path";

const s = new Spectral();

const doc = new Document(
  `{
  "street": null
}`,
  JsonParser,
  path.join(__dirname, "street-doc.json"),
);

await spectral.run(doc);
```

The workaround here can look as follows

```ts
import { Spectral } from "@stoplight/spectral-core";
import { createHttpAndFileResolver } from "@stoplight/spectral-ref-resolver";
import ProxyAgent from "proxy-agent";

const spectral = new Spectral({
  resolver: createHttpAndFileResolver({ agent: new ProxyAgent(process.env.PROXY) }),
});
```

## Functions

1. `schema` function uses Ajv v8 in favor of Ajv v6. It is preferred to provide JSON Schema Draft 7 schemas or newer, albeit older drafts are also supported via json-schema-migrate.
   `oasVersion` is no longer supported. Use `oasSchema` function from the OAS ruleset if you want to supply OAS Schema Object.

2. `schemaPath` is no longer available. If you happened to use this function, you can write a custom function that implements the same functionality.

## CLI

1. deprecated `--show-unmatched-globs` flag has been removed. Alternative available: `--fail-on-unmatched-globs`

2. `--skip-rule` has been removed. Use a custom ruleset instead - set a severity of a particular rule to "off".

## Rulesets

### OAS

#### Changed

- `oas2-valid-parameter-example` & `oas2-valid-definition-example` & `oas2-valid-response-schema-example` into `oas2-valid-schema-example`.

Change: merge

- `oas2-valid-response-example` -> `oas2-valid-media-example`

Change: rename

- Merged `oas3-valid-parameter-schema-example` & `oas3-valid-header-schema-example` & `oas3-valid-schema-example` into `oas3-valid-schema-example`

Change: merge

- Merged `oas3-valid-oas-parameter-example` & `oas3-valid-oas-header-example` & `oas3-valid-oas-content-example` `oas3-valid-media-example`

Change: merge

- `operation-2xx-response` -> `operation-success-response`

Change: 3xx response is accepted as well.

- `oas3-unused-components-schema` -> `oas3-unused-component`

Change: all reusable `components` are now validated.

#### Removed

- `operation-default-response`

Workaround: Insert the following rule to your custom ruleset.

```json
 "operation-default-response": {
  "description": "Operations must have a default response.",
  "recommended": false,
  "type": "style",
  "given": "$.paths.*.*.responses",
  "then": {
    "field": "default",
    "function": "truthy"
  }
},
```
